GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: My
only wish is continued success
for this great
country that I love so very
much.
GWEN IFILL: David Cameron steps
down as British
prime minister, handing over the
increasingly
complicated job of governing an
independent
Britain to Conservative Theresa
May.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
Speculation mounts over possible
V.P. picks,
as Donald Trump spars with
Supreme Court Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Hillary
Clinton calls
out Trump for being divisive.
GWEN IFILL: And the latest in
our
series The End of AIDS takes us
to New York
state, home to nearly one in 10
HIV-positive
Americans.
JON COHEN, "Science": New York
has so many
infected people that it has
problems of scale
when trying to end an epidemic.
It buys more
drug than anywhere else to treat
HIV-infected
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The first
funerals were held
today for the police officers
shot to death
by a sniper in Dallas last week.
Thousands
attended memorials for three of
the five victims,
police Senior Corporal Lorne
Ahrens, Police
Sergeant Michael Smith, and
Rapid Transit
Officer Brent Thompson.
Thompson's wife, a fellow
officer, spoke at
his service.
EMILY THOMPSON, Widow of Brent
Thompson: Brent
loves all of his brothers and
sisters in blue.
I encourage you to stand with
me, continue
to wear the badge with me,
remembering the
oath we took. We will not, we
cannot, we shall
not let the act of a coward
break us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Elsewhere, the
American Civil
Liberties Union and others sued
the police
in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, over
their treatment
of protesters.
And President Obama called in
police chiefs,
mayors and civil rights
activists to talk
about building trust between
police and minorities.
GWEN IFILL: China today rejected
an international
court's ruling against its
claims in the South
China Sea. Chinese planes made
test landings
on newly built artificial
islands. And, in
Beijing, the Foreign Ministry
said it may
impose an air defense zone over
the region.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): China
firmly upholds
the dignity and solemnity of
international
law. We will by no means agree
upon the sheer
fallacy that the award from an
illegal arbitration
tribunal is legally binding.
GWEN IFILL: Taiwan also
condemned the tribunal's
ruling. It has similar
territorial claims
to those of mainland China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly 50 more
U.S. troops
arrived in South Sudan's capital
today to
protest American citizens and --
protect,
I should say, American citizens
and property.
That follows days of fighting
between rival
factions, until a cease-fire
yesterday.
Meanwhile, U.N. peacekeepers
helped evacuate
civilians from the city today.
There were
also reports that armed men have
attacked
people trying to flee, and
demanded money.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, Wall Street
took a pause from its recent
rally. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
24 points
to close at 18372. The Nasdaq
fell 17 points,
and the S&P 500 added a
fraction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
a new prime minister moves into
10 Downing
Street; who could fill the vice
presidential
slot for Donald Trump?; New
York's daunting
task of defeating AIDS; and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: The United Kingdom
has a new prime
minister, and her name is
Theresa May. Only
the second woman ever to hold
the office,
May takes over the top job after
an extraordinarily
rapid turn of events following
last month's
popular vote to exit the
European Union.
We begin our coverage from
London with this
report from Chris Ship of
Independent Television
News.
CHRIS SHIP: Less than three
weeks as print
voted in the E.U. referendum, a
new prime
minister, Theresa May, was
walking along Downing
Street and a new political
chapter was beginning
in British history. Not just a
new occupant
in the building, but a new
direction, as Mrs.
May made clear from her first
words in her
new job.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: I have
just been to Buckingham Palace,
where Her
Majesty the Queen has asked me
to form a new
government, and I accepted.
The government I lead will be
driven not by
the interests of the privileged
few, but by
yours. We are living through an
important
moment in our country's history.
Following
the referendum, we face a time
of great national
change. And I know, because we
are Great Britain,
that we will rise to the
challenge. As we
leave the European Union, we
will forge a
bold, new, positive role for
ourselves in
the world.
CHRIS SHIP: Theresa May became
the 76th prime
minister of the United Kingdom
and only the
second woman ever to hold the
post, after
driving the short distance from
Westminster
to Buckingham Palace.
Mrs. May and husband Philip
arrived in the
courtyard just a few minutes
after David Cameron
had tendered his resignation as
prime minister.
This was the moment Theresa May
was invited
to form a government of her own
by Her Majesty
the Queen.
Of course, a new prime minister
entering Downing
Street means the old one must
leave. And David
Cameron did leave today, his
wife, Samantha,
his daughters Nancy and
Florence, his son
Elwen by his side.
DAVID CAMERON, Former British
Prime Minister:
It's not been an easy journey,
and, of course,
we have not got every decision
right, but
I do believe that, today, our
country is much
stronger. It has been the
greatest honor of
my life to serve our country as
prime minister
over these last six years and to
serve as
leader of my party for almost 11
years.
And as we leave for the last
time, my only
wish is continued success for
this great country
that i love so very much.
Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
CHRIS SHIP: Mr. Cameron's final
performance
in front of M.P.s had happened
earlier in
the day, his last ever prime
minister's questions.
Cheers first greeted Theresa
May, and then
cheers for the man Mrs. May was
about to replace.
DAVID CAMERON: Mr. Speaker this
morning, I
had meetings with ministerial
colleagues and
others. Other than one meeting
this afternoon
with Her Majesty the Queen, the
diary for
the rest of the day is
remarkably light.
(LAUGHTER)
CHRIS SHIP: Next week, it will
be Theresa
May's turn. Today, though, she
was just a
spectator.
DAVID CAMERON: Nothing is really
impossible
if you put your mind to it.
After all, as
I once said, I was the future
once.
(LAUGHTER)
CHRIS SHIP: But he is not the
future. He is
now the past. His job in this
place was done.
Her job, however, is just
beginning tonight.
The black door of Number 10 has
a new occupant.
GWEN IFILL: Joining me now to
discuss today's
historic events and this
remarkable time in
the U.K. is Sir Peter
Westmacott, a longtime
diplomat in the British Foreign
Service. He
left his post as British
ambassador to the
U.S. earlier this year, and
served before
that as ambassador to France and
Turkey.
Mr. Ambassador, welcome.
It's been a head-spinning day, a
head-spinning
time. How are things now doing
in Britain?
What can you tell us about
Britain now?
SIR PETER WESTMACOTT, Former
British Ambassador
to the United States: Well, it's
good to be
with you again.
I think we're all still a bit
shell-shocked,
but I think the main change
that's happened
in the less than three weeks,
can you believe
it, since the referendum is that
even those
people who thought it was the
wrong outcome
and felt that the campaign to
leave the European
Union was based on a lot of
misrepresentation
and fraudulent facts and so on,
everybody
has more or less come to terms
with the fact
that this is going to happen,
the negotiations
are going to begin, even if many
of us believe
that, at some point before the
deed is done,
the British people will need to
be consulted
again, either in a general
election or in
another referendum and so on.
But, meanwhile, the political
drama has accelerated
with great speed. David Cameron,
prime minister,
chose to resign, thought that he
was going
to be there until the 9th of
September, and,
boom, suddenly, in a couple of
days, because
there was no other candidate but
Theresa May
to succeed him, he finds that
the removal
van has arrived and he's left
and he's been
to see the queen. And we have a
new prime
minister and we have half a new
Cabinet, well,
not quite half, but a number of
senior positions
already announced.
So I think the mood is one of
some surprise,
amazement at how quickly things
move, and
coming to terms with new
realities.
GWEN IFILL: Tell us about
Theresa May. You
know her. Tell us what we can
expect of her.
SIR PETER WESTMACOTT: Well, I
knew her, saw
a good deal of her when she came
to stay with
us when I was ambassador in
France, when we
had big migration issues, and
also, of course,
when she used to come to
Washington.
I think she's a very
businesslike, no-nonsense
person. She's not someone who
has cliquey
personal entourages. She is very
grounded.
she comes from a humble,
straightforward background,
a vicar's daughter. And I'm a
vicar's son
myself, so I can say these
things.
She is very professional. She
does her homework.
She likes to get her way, I
would say. And
she makes up her mind and she's
pretty hard
to shift unless you are very,
very sure of
your ground. But she has made a
couple of
speeches in the last day or two
which are
extraordinarily inclusive and
very centrist,
even, I would say, and quite
surprising for
somebody who was considered to
be on the right
of the Conservative Party, about
the importance
of the British people coming
together and
of a government which is for all
the people
and not just the privileged few.
So, I think that may have
surprised a few
people, but encouraged a lot of
people as
well.
GWEN IFILL: She moved quickly
today to fill
her Cabinet, including making
Boris Johnson,
who declined to run for prime
minister, her
-- to make her foreign minister,
and Philip
Hammond her finance minister.
These are the
two men who are going to have
execute these
Brexit negotiations.
SIR PETER WESTMACOTT: Well, they
are, but
they're also going to have one
other key player
is going to be the leader of the
negotiation,
of whatever it's going to be
called, the department
of the withdrawal from the
European Union,
who is going to be David Davis.
So, Philip Hammond, you're
right, my old boss,
extremely knowledgeable about
accounts, numbers,
an experienced negotiator,
understands budgets,
sorted out the finances of the
Ministry of
Defense when he was defense
secretary, he's
gone to Treasury. And I think
that is an appointment
that will be widely welcomed.
I think the appointment of Boris
to the Foreign
Office was probably a surprise
as much to
him as to many other people,
because after
the referendum, which seemed --
the result
of which seemed to surprise him,
he didn't
appear to be quite clear what he
did next
and made a number of statements
which suggested
that nothing was going to change
between Britain's
relationship and the European
Union.
So I think he will be thrilled.
Obviously,
he's visibly delighted to go to
the Foreign
Office, born in the United
States of America,
partly Turkish, partly American,
great cosmopolitan,
extremely cultured man, speaks
lots of languages.
He will have a wonderful time in
the Foreign
Office. And he will not, I
suspect,be in the
lead of these particular
negotiations. I think
that will be left to the other
ministers largely,
but I'm not sure about that.
That depends
very much on how the prime
minister handles
it.
And my guess is that her own
relationship
with Angela Merkel is going to
be critical
to the success of those
negotiations, too.
GWEN IFILL: Does David Cameron
leaving the
scene so quickly today, does he
leave behind
a legacy of failure or success?
SIR PETER WESTMACOTT: I think
(INAUDIBLE)
probably, some good stuff, some
bad stuff.
I think my own view is that the
grand coalition
that he was bold enough to
create when he
didn't win a majority in the
general election
in 2010 was a remarkable piece
of political
accomplishment. I think the
coalition government
between the Lib Dems and the
Conservatives
worked very well for the first
parliamentary
term between 2010 and 2015.
In some ways, it smoothed the
corners, if
you like, of the policies of
each party. And
demonstrably the prime minister
and Deputy
Prime Minister Nick Clegg got on
very well.
And I think they got some good
business done,
so I think that was a plus.
I think the way in which he got
the British
economy going after the meltdown
of 2008 and
2009 was pretty remarkable. The
United Kingdom
has a level of unemployment
which is less
than half the European average.
We have been
growing at the fastest rate of
any European
Union country for the last three
years. Along
the United States, we have been
leading the
Western democracies out of
recession.
They have cut the deficit by
more than half.
So I think the economic story
will be a plus
for David Cameron. And running
the referendum
and winning it on Scotland was a
plus. People
said at the time it was a
gamble, but, in
the end, there was a 10-point
difference,
so that kept Scotland in the
United Kingdom.
But his legacy inevitably is
going to one
which is colored by the fact
that he took
something of a gamble in
organizing this referendum
because his own party had become
somewhat
ungovernable, believed that he
could win if
it came to the referendum
actually being held.
And alas for him and alas for,
in my view,
many of us, it didn't work out.
And so the United Kingdom is
leaving, and
I think that the United
Kingdom's decision
to vote to leave the European
Union is inevitably
going to be one of the main
features of David
Cameron's political legacy.
GWEN IFILL: Former British
Ambassador to the
United States Peter Westmacott,
thank you
very much.
SIR PETER WESTMACOTT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For Republicans,
the countdown
to their national convention in
Cleveland
is on, with a major focus on who
will be the
vice presidential choice.
The party's nominee-to-be spent
this day working
to answer that question.
Donald Trump and Indiana
Governor Mike Pence,
after meeting this morning in
Indianapolis.
Pence also appeared with Trump
last night
at a rally.
GOV. MIKE PENCE (R), Indiana: We
are ready
to put a fighter, a builder, and
a patriot
in the Oval Office of the United
States of
America. We're ready for Donald
Trump to be
our next president.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alabama Senator
Jeff Sessions
met with Trump today, too, as
did former House
Speaker Newt Gingrich. He had
served as warm-up
act in Ohio last week.
On FOX News yesterday, Gingrich
likened the
veep search to a certain reality
show.
NEWT GINGRICH (R), Former
Speaker of the House:
It's a little bit like "The
Apprentice." You
find out sooner or later who is
the last one
standing is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie
huddled with the candidate
yesterday, after
campaigning with him Monday in
Virginia.
Trump told The Wall Street
Journal yesterday
that he wants a running mate who
can go on
the attack to answer the attacks
on him. That
means going after his Democratic
opponent,
Hillary Clinton. She appeared
today in Springfield,
Illinois, where President
Lincoln long ago
warned of a house divided.
Clinton singled
out Trump.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
His campaign is as divisive as
any we have
seen in our lifetimes. It is
built on stoking
mistrust and pitting American
against American.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Trump is also
taking fire
from an unexpected quarter,
Supreme Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. In
recent days,
she told The New York Times --
quote -- "I
can't imagine what the country
would be with
Donald Trump as our president."
Ginsburg made similar remarks in
other interviews,
and Trump fired back in an
early-morning tweet.
He said Ginsburg -- quote --
"embarrassed
all by making very dumb
political statements
about me. Her mind is shot.
Resign."
It was amid that furor that
Trump's camp said
he was aiming to make a final
running mate
decision by Friday.
And we unpack it all now with
Susan Page,
Washington bureau chief for USA
Today, and
Robert Costa, national political
reporter
at The Washington Post.
And there's a lot to talk about,
but, Susan,
let's start with the veep search
on Donald
Trump's part, very public. What
do you make
of this process, including his
children, and
all these interviews? And does
it come down
to these three or four people?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
This is just one more way in
which Donald
Trump has changed the way we
view politics,
how politics works.
The vice presidential search is
usually something
that's very coy. They're talking
to the people
who are being talked about, say
they're not
interesting or try to tamp down
speculation
about it. In this case, we have
had tryouts
in front of our eyes about
whether they can
be at a rally with Trump, how
they connect
with him.
So that has been different, and
I think that's
been a good thing. I think we're
seeing now
is a debate between Donald
Trump's head and
his heart, because his head says
Mike Pence
is a guy who rounds out his
resume, who gives
him some unity with parts of the
Republican
Party like evangelicals and Tea
Party types
that he does haven't the best
relationships
with.
But I bet his heart is saying
Gingrich or
Chris Christie or just guys he
would prefer
to be around and rather see in
that debate
against Hillary Clinton's vice
presidential
candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Costa,
what are you
learning about all this? Where
do you think
Donald Trump is right now in
this?
ROBERT COSTA, The Washington
Post: I think
Susan's spot-on with her
analysis.
What I'm hearing from Trump
campaign associates
is that Pence is at the top of
the list for
many of the family members who
traveled with
Trump today in Indiana. Paul
Manafort, the
campaign chairman, is also said
to be inclined
toward the Indiana governor.
But that means -- that doesn't
necessarily
mean that Trump has made a
decision. He's
flying to California tonight
with a populist
conservative from Alabama,
Senator Jeff Sessions.
And he is continuing to try to
think through
his options, wondering whether
he wants an
attack dog or, as Susan said,
someone to round
out that resume.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Susan, so
what does that
say to us that it's narrowed
down to these
four, and including, as Robert
said, Senator
Sessions from Alabama?
SUSAN PAGE: Yes, and we're not
quite sure
why Senator Sessions is on that
list. He was
an early supporter, and this may
be a way
to say thank you to Senator
Sessions for standing
with him.
It tells us he chose only men.
The standard
political calculation would have
had a woman
in that mix as a finalist,
especially since
Donald Trump had some trouble
with women voters.
He didn't do that. And it's
people who want
to be on the ticket with him.
He's not coaxing somebody who's
reluctant
to be on the ticket. He's going
to choose
somebody who is out there
comfortable auditioning
for it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Eager for it.
And, Robert Costa, what do you
make again
of the process? I mean, it stuck
that he has
his grown children in these
meetings. How
typical is that?
ROBERT COSTA: It's atypical.
Trump doesn't really function
with a normal
political organization. He
counts on his family
for counsel and some advisers.
But this is
someone who operates by making a
lot of phone
calls, bringing in friends and
different people
who he's been with throughout
his life and
soliciting their advice, their
take on the
vice presidential search.
And he's getting a lot of
political calculations
thrown his way, but what's most
important
to Trump, if you read his books
or if you
speak to him himself, he wants a
rapport,
he wants a connection, someone
he can trust.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, let's turn
to -- well,
we will find out soon enough.
We're told it
is going to happen either
Thursday or Friday
of this week.
Let's turn to this really
remarkable, I guess,
series of criticisms that the
Supreme Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg has
launched on
Donald Trump. Very unusual.
SUSAN PAGE: Never in modern
times have we
seen these kind of exchanges.
When justices in the past have
had a slip
of the tongue, as Sandra Day
O'Connor did
on election night in 2000, it
hasn't been
the kind of deliberate attempt
we have seen
by Justice Ginsburg. She didn't
just say this
once. She said it to the
Associated Press,
and then she said it The New
York Times, and
then she said it to Joan
Biskupic.
So, this was a message she
wanted to get out.
And it's managed to get The Post
and The Times
to editorialize on Trump's side.
So, that
is something very rare in this
election season.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Costa, how
is the Trump
campaign seeing this? As
somebody who covers
politics, how unusual does it
look to you
to hear a Supreme Court justice
going after
a political candidate?
ROBERT COSTA: It is unusual.
But inside of the Trump campaign
today in
Indiana, they are framing the
justice's comments
as condescension, condescension
that Trump
may try to use, in his mind, for
political
advantage by running as someone
who's politically
incorrect, anti-establishment.
They think
this kind of battle playing out
in public
could be useful to Trump in the
coming months
as he tries to solidify himself
as someone
who is an outsider.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's my
question, Susan.
What kind of -- does something
like this have
consequences down the road?
SUSAN PAGE: I'm not sure this is
very -- I'm
not sure this has big
consequences.
I think if you agree with
Justice Ginsburg,
you probably think, hey, great,
I'm glad she
spoke up. If you disagree with
her, you're
probably on Trump's side. There
are going
to be a lot of things that are
very important
in this election. And I think
this is one
of the things that's more
interesting of the
moment than something with
lasting political
consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The last thing I
want to ask
you both about is what's been
going on already
in Cleveland this week, and that
is meetings
of different Republican
committees.
One of them has to do with the
convention,
one of them, Robert, having to
do with the
platform. It is looking to be a
pretty conservative
document. What do we know about
that? What
does that say to us? Should we
even be paying
attention to it?
ROBERT COSTA: The platform is
very ideologically
conservative.
And this is a way the Trump
campaign and the
Republican National Committee
believe they
can make an overture to the
elements of the
Republican Party that are
disgruntled about
Trump's nomination. And they are
saying, look,
Trump may be more centrist and
populist on
a lot of these issues, but when
it comes to
the party, we're still down the
line, even
hard-line conservative.
What's most important here is
that the Republican
National Committee is trying to
tamp down
any kind of revolt or uprising
among these
delegates against Trump. And
Republican Chairman
Priebus is working closely with
Trump to ensure
that doesn't happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, they're using
this as a
way to tamp down disagreement?
SUSAN PAGE: But they're creating
big problems
for themselves with some of the
groups that
after that -- in that autopsy
they did after
the 2012 defeat, they said they
needed to
do -- they needed to do, for
instance, more
to reach out to young people, to
African-Americans,
to Hispanics, to gay people.
This platform doesn't do any of
that. The
stance on gay rights, on gay
marriage is more
conservative than the platform
that was enacted
in 2012. So, in terms of
appealing, say, to
millennials, this is not going
to do the Republican
Party any good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were telling
me that it
has even language in there about
requiring
-- looking at conversion therapy
for individuals
who are gay.
SUSAN PAGE: It has language that
approves
of parents using this
controversial technique
called conversion therapy for
their gay children.
That's something that even Chris
Christie
signed a law banning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Robert, so
are these things that we can
expect Donald
Trump to try to implement?
ROBERT COSTA: Unlikely.
If you look at Donald Trump, he
had a phone
call in recent weeks with
Caitlyn Jenner.
He's someone who comes out of
Manhattan. He's
comfortable with people of all
different backgrounds
and orientations. He's not a
social conservative.
He's never really been a
traditional social
conservative, but he's running
to be the standard
bearer of a party the Times
Square has moved
increasingly to the right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, some
interesting questions.
And we will be looking at it at
the convention
next week.
Robert Costa with The Washington
Post, Susan
Page with USA Today, we will see
you both.
Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Next, we continue
our series The
End of AIDS.
Tonight, we go to New York
state, where health
care providers are trying
innovative approaches
to bring HIV infection under
control. While
pushing widespread use of the
HIV prevention
drug Truvada, they are also
trying to expand
care to the state's
hardest-to-reach populations.
Correspondent William Brangham
and producer
Jason Kane continue their
reporting, which
is supported by the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis
Reporting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This might not
look like
a breeding ground for HIV, and
Tina Wolf might
not look like a typical health
worker, but
she is.
Her windblown drives across Long
Island, New
York, are part of a statewide
effort to get
out of clinics and medical
centers to find
hard-to-reach people. Wolf
recently started
a needle exchange program for
injection drug
users. Sharing infected needles
is one of
the most efficient ways to
spread HIV.
So, each day, she and a small
staff pack up
hundreds of clean syringes.
TINA WOLF, Community Action for
Social Justice:
I brought 200, so we need
another 200 29-gauge
half-CCs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They load them
into her
hatchback, and head out.
New York, like so many states,
has a growing
heroin problem. Wolf wants to
stop HIV from
piggybacking onto that crisis.
TINA WOLF: It could very well
turn into a
new HIV epidemic if we don't get
ahead of
it in terms of syringe exchange
right now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In
middle-class neighborhoods
throughout the island, Wolf goes
to meet her
clients.
JEN, New York: Hi.
TINA WOLF: Hey, how are you?
JEN: Good. How are you?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today, she
meets with this
woman, a woman who prefers only
to be known
as Jen.
JEN: It's perfect timing,
because I ran out
two days ago.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Most needle
exchanges would
require Jen to come to them, but
Wolf makes
house calls. Before these
deliveries, Jen
says she and her boyfriend would
reuse needles
until they became dull as butter
knives. And
even though Jen knows lots of
people with
HIV, she's shared needles in the
past.
JEN: You're not going to say,
oh, I'm going
to wait until I get a new one.
You're going
to wait until the person who's
in the car
with you is done. Maybe you will
rinse it
out with the bottle of water in
the car, and
you get high, and you don't
think about it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That
needle-sharing is what
public health officials say
drove the recent
HIV outbreak in Austin, Indiana,
which prompted
a state of emergency there.
JEN: I have done things that
other people
have done, and they have ended
up with all
different diseases. So, I feel
like, with
Tina, I can avoid all that now.
GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D), New York:
We will not
stop until we add AIDS to the
list of conquered
killers!
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last year, New
York Governor
Andrew Cuomo pledged $200
million to ramp
up efforts statewide to end the
AIDS epidemic
here by 2020. Their aim is to
cut the rate
of new HIV infections below the
rate of HIV-related
deaths.
But New York, one of the states
hardest-hit
by the epidemic over the years,
still has
enormous challenges. Nearly one
in 10 people
with HIV in America lives here.
That's an
estimated 154,000 HIV-positive
New Yorkers.
Approximately 3,000 people are
diagnosed statewide
every year. And, here,
minorities bear the
brunt of the infections. An
estimated 70 percent
of new cases are among blacks
and Latinos.
Jon Cohen has been covering
HIV/AIDS for more
than 25 years for "Science"
magazine, and
helped us report this series. He
says New
York's plan is bold, but the
state has a tremendous
challenge ahead.
JON COHEN, "Science": New York
has so many
infected people that it has
problems of scale
when trying to end an epidemic.
It buys more
drug than anywhere else to treat
HIV-infected
people. It has to track, monitor
more HIV-infected
people. It has to address the
failures that
are far larger than anywhere
else in a way
that's just more overwhelming
than any other
jurisdiction in the country
faces.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Step one for
public health
workers is finding those who are
infected
and don't know it. They're the
most likely
drivers of new HIV cases.
MAN: I love this outreach here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: An estimated
22,000 New
Yorkers fit that bill.
So, how do you identify them?
MAN: So, what we would want to
do is look
for like hiding spots right now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Here in
Harlem, sometimes,
that looks like an adult version
of hide and
seek.
MAN: So, usually, like, you will
see them
standing up there, like along
the railing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Robert Gamboa
and Jose Velez
(ph) work for the Harlem
Prevention Center.
It's part of an organization
called ICAP out
of Columbia University. Their
job is reaching
out to gay and bisexual men,
encouraging HIV
prevention, and inviting them to
join the
center's research.
MAN: Behind the tree over here,
that's clearly
out of view.
MAN: Hmm. Oh.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They target
well-known cruising
spots where men often have sex.
Gamboa sees
a couple having oral sex behind
a tree, and
he doesn't hesitate.
MAN: What up, man? I work with
Harlem Prevention
Center. We do research studies.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Each new HIV
infection that's
prevented saves almost
half-a-million dollars
in lifetime treatment costs.
DR. WAFAA EL-SADR, Director,
ICAP: It would
be very interesting to think of
what we can
do.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Wafaa
El-Sadr oversees
ICAP, which also supports global
HIV prevention
and treatment programs. She says
testing as
many people as possible, and
treating them
as quickly as possible, is one
of the best
tools for ending the epidemic.
DR. WAFAA EL-SADR: Getting those
individuals
into care, on treatment, for
their own benefit,
as well as, of course, to
prevent transmission
from them to others, that's
something that
we have to tackle. And that's
usually individuals
who are disenfranchised, afraid,
in denial,
stigmatized. So it's a
hard-to-reach population
that we must reach.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: New York has
also pioneered
other data-driven ways to find
people in need
of HIV care. Using Medicaid
information, the
state works in tandem with
specialized insurance
companies like Amida Care to
identify patients
who've stopped having tests or
stopped refilling
prescriptions for their HIV
meds.
Outreach workers then try to get
them back
into treatment. Right now in New
York, Medicaid
covers half the HIV-positive
people in the
state, so keeping those people
in care is
crucial. One estimate said
nearly $4 billion
could be saved in New York by
successfully
caring for this slice of the
population.
So Amida Care's staff try the
phone first.
MAN: No, she didn't answer.
MAN: OK.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: If that
doesn't work, they
will often head out into the
city to go knock
on doors, anything they can do
to get people
back on track.
Breaking down the barriers that
keep people
from consistent HIV care is the
next step.
A few years ago, that the issue
for Joe Pannell.
He's HIV-positive. And he was
given antiretroviral
medications. But he was homeless
then and
addicted to crack and alcohol,
so staying
on those meds was pretty low on
the list of
priorities.
JOE PANNELL, HIV Patient: I
would go to the
doctor and he'd give me
medication, I would
sell it. I didn't take it.
Finally ,one of
the doctors told me, he said,
that's suicidal.
He said, everything you're
doing, it sounds
like to me you're trying to kill
yourself.
Hi.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But that all
changed when
he got a roof over his head. New
York says
this is their -- quote --
"greatest unmet
need," helping the estimated
10,000 to 12,000
HIV-positive New Yorkers who
need housing
assistance.
Joe Pannell now lives in an
apartment complex
run by Housing Works, and not
only do they
provide a home, but residents
here can also
get their HIV treatment in the
same building.
CHARLES KING, CEO, Housing
Works: Part of
the idea of developing this type
of facility
was that a person living
upstairs, the way
I like to say it is, they can
crawl out of
bed and they will fall into the
program.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Charles King
started Housing
Works. They provide 241 units
for low-income
HIV-positive people in New York.
King was
also instrumental in the
creation of New York's
broader HIV plan. He says
homelessness is
a clear risk factor for
acquiring HIV.
CHARLES KING: It doesn't matter
what risk
category you fall into, if
you're a gay man,
man who has sex with men,
transgender person,
sex worker. Homelessness
magnifies the vulnerabilities
that are going to expose you to
HIV.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Like the
majority of HIV-positive
residents in Housing Works,
Pannell is now
taking his antiretroviral drugs
regularly.
The virus is now undetectable in
his blood.
His life is back on track, he
says. Long-lost
family members are reaching out
to him again.
JOE PANNELL: Since I came here,
all of these
things reoccurred in my life. My
daughter
called me one night, and said,
"Hi, daddy."
I could not believe it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Over the last
10 years,
New York has been successfully
bending its
HIV/AIDS curve, reducing new
infections by
40 percent and reducing the
number of HIV-related
deaths by even more.
Whether these are enough to
break the back
of the epidemic remains to be
seen.
DR. WAFAA EL-SADR: I think we
can do it. I
think it can be done. I'm not
saying we're
going to go to zero, but I think
we can decrease
the numbers substantially.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Public health
advocates
say that, absent a vaccine or a
cure, the
challenge ahead is maintaining,
and intensifying,
these efforts. They argue ending
AIDS in New
York means prevention has to be
dialed up
and more people brought into
care.
The state needs increased
housing for the
most vulnerable and sustained
lifetime treatment
for tens of thousands of people
for many years
to come.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in New York.
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow night, our
series on
The End of AIDS turns from the
epidemic here
to the one in sub-Saharan
Africa, and specifically
to Rwanda, a nation that's
recovered from
a genocide, and has now achieved
impressive
results tackling HIV.
Here's a preview.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At this
hospital in a remote
northern area of Rwanda, a small
medical miracle
is unfolding. This district,
still in the
grips of an HIV epidemic, has
not recorded
a single case of mother-to-child
HIV transmissions
for three years.
Similar progress has been
happening throughout
Rwanda, outpacing many other
places in the
world, even many in the U.S.
GWEN IFILL: That's tomorrow
right here on
the "NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour" from
the creator
of New York's High Line comes a
new public
square in Cleveland, just in
time for the
Republican Convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first: how
science is
increasingly considering the
possibilities
of medical marijuana as
conventional medicine
for some cases.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien has the
second of his two reports on
this for our
weekly series The Leading Edge.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's a landmark
place, and
time, on the long road to bring
medicinal
marijuana into the scientific
mainstream.
The New England Treatment
Access, or NETA,
dispensary in Brookline,
Massachusetts, is
housed in a Beaux-Arts bank
building built
in the 1920s, a cathedral of
cannabis.
Paul Breeden (ph) has been a
coming here to
treat chronic pain since the
dispensary opened
in February.
PAUL BREEDEN, Chronic Pain
Patient: I have
been praying for this day all my
life. I have
been fighting for this day all
my life. I'm
a son of a minister. I believe
God created
marijuana. Humans don't know how
God works.
MILES O'BRIEN: Look at that
thing.
NETA is a nonprofit, serving
about 7,000 medical
marijuana customers now. The
goal is to supply
10,000 on an ongoing basis.
Besides dried
flowers and buds that can be
smoked, they
offer pills, vapor cartridges,
creams, tinctures,
brownies, chocolates and
lozenges.
PAUL BREEDEN: It's really part
of sort of
the normalization of medical
cannabis. The
days of Ziploc baggies are over.
MILES O'BRIEN: Norton Arbelaez
is a NETA consultant
who turned to medical marijuana
after he contracted
a staph infection 10 years ago.
NORTON ARBELAEZ, Consultant, New
England Treatment
Access: I had quite a bit of
pain. I was prescribed
opiate painkillers. And I made
up a decision,
a very conscious decision to not
take them.
So, I had to find a way to
medicate otherwise.
I did some research, and
cannabis seemed like
a good choice for me.
MILES O'BRIEN: Arbelaez believes
this classic
old bank is brick-and-mortar
proof pot is
in emerging from prohibition,
not just legally,
but also in the court of public
opinion.
NORTON ARBELAEZ: We are coming
out of the
shadows and into the mainstream.
What better
way to say that than to be in
such a beautiful
and historic building, the
first, really,
of this magnitude on the Eastern
Seaboard,
I think is a harbinger of things
to come.
MILES O'BRIEN: Five minutes away
from the
dispensary, another possible
harbinger.
MAN: I can think of no better
place to host
the first annual CannMed
Conference than here
at Harvard Medical School, so
welcome.
(APPLAUSE)
MILES O'BRIEN: The first annual
Personalized
Cannabinoid Medicine Conference
at Harvard
Medical School in April, an
unprecedented
meeting of the minds in the
world of medicinal
marijuana.
DR. RAPHAEL MECHOULAM, Hebrew
University of
Jerusalem: For almost 30 years,
nothing happened.
MILES O'BRIEN: And the father of
marijuana
research was here to receive a
lifetime achievement
award. Raphael Mechoulam is an
Israeli chemist
who became interested in
cannabis when he
began his scientific career.
DR. RAPHAEL MECHOULAM: And I was
kind of surprised
to find out that the chemistry
of cannabis,
an important drug, in my view,
wasn't well-known.
As a matter of fact, we didn't
know at that
time -- I'm speaking of the
early '60s -- the
active compounds had not been
isolated in
pure form.
MILES O'BRIEN: In 1963, he
identified the
structure of cannabidiol, CBD,
one of the
most medically important
compounds found in
cannabis, and, in 1964, he
isolated the active
component of marijuana,
tetrahydrocannabinol,
THC.
DR. RAPHAEL MECHOULAM: I thought
that as soon
as we know the chemistry and the
pharmacology
and then the toxicity, and if
there are any
positive effects, companies will
go in and
take compounds and go ahead with
clinical
trials, which is true for a
huge, huge number
of drugs.
MILES O'BRIEN: But this drug is
like no other.
It was made illegal one year
after the 1936
release of a cinematic diatribe
against marijuana
called "Reefer Madness."
NORTON ARBELAEZ: It's not so
much the
substance itself. It's who uses
it. The substance
was associated with
Mexican-American and
African-American
communities. If you look at the
precepts of
"Reefer Madness," it's a pretty,
I would say,
embarrassing part of our
national history.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the U.S.,
marijuana still
remains classified as a Schedule
1 controlled
substance, the same category as
heroin, cocaine
and LSD, with tight restrictions
for researchers
and no accepted use for medical
treatment.
Still, Dr. Mechoulam pressed on,
gradually
writing the scientific textbook
on marijuana.
But for years, he didn't fully
understand
how and why cannabis works in
our bodies.
And then, in the early '90s, he
had a eureka
moment.
DR. RAPHAEL MECHOULAM: THC
mimics compounds
which we make called endogenous
cannabinoids,
which our brain makes, our body
makes. THC
mimics their effects. All this
is called the
endocannabinoid system, and this
endocannabinoid
system seems to be extremely
important.
MILES O'BRIEN: Here's how
endocannabinoids
works in our nervous system.
The nerves that form the
electrical grid of
our body are not continuous
strands of fiber.
Instead, there are many gaps in
the wiring.
The nerve ends are called
neurons, the gaps,
synapses. The electrical current
is transmitted
from neuron to neuron across
synapses by chemical
messengers called
neurotransmitters.
The volume and route of these
signals determines
what we are thinking, what we
perceive and
what we feel. Our body generates
cannabinoids
to help regulate the flow of
these neurotransmitters.
Scientists suspect the active
ingredient in
cannabis, THC, can either can
increase or
decrease the flow of the
neurotransmitters.
And this can have all kinds of
impacts on
our physical state of being.
DR. RAPHAEL MECHOULAM: The
endocannabinoid
system is involved in
essentially all human
diseases.
MILES O'BRIEN: Different
endocannabanoid receptors
are found in non-nerve cells in
the immune
system, for example. So perhaps
it is no surprise
that researchers suspect
cannabis can do so
many things, from fighting
cancer, to concussions,
to Crohn's disease.
But perhaps the most dramatic
story of how
cannabis might be good medicine
is in epilepsy.
In the '70s and '80s, Dr.
Mechoulam published
studies that showed CBD can curb
seizures.
There was no further research,
until parents
of epileptic children who didn't
respond to
conventional pharmaceuticals
discovered Dr.
Mechoulam's work.
CATHERINE JACOBSON,
Neuroscientist: I do this
with two hats.
MILES O'BRIEN: Neuroscientist
Catherine Jacobson
told her story to the cannabis
medical conference
at Harvard. Her 7-year-old son,
Ben, has epilepsy.
After discovering Dr.
Mechoulam's papers,
she started giving Ben daily
homemade doses
of CBD, at times making the
formula in her
garage.
His seizures diminished by 40
percent.
CATHERINE JACOBSON: But it's
excruciating
to think about what we went
through to get
here, right, and what might have
happened
if we have been able to do this
five years
ago or six years ago.
I know for a fact he would be a
different
kid today if he hadn't suffered
all that brain
damage.
MILES O'BRIEN: Her experience
with her son
and CBD prompted her to redirect
her scientific
career. She now heads clinical
research for
Tilray, a Canadian medical
marijuana company
trying to turn cannabis into
conventional
medicine.
CATHERINE JACOBSON: If it can't
happen in
the U.S., then we're going to
make it happen
globally.
MILES O'BRIEN: But Dr. Mechoulam
believes
the pace of research will
increase dramatically
if prohibition in the U.S. is
lifted.
DR. RAPHAEL MECHOULAM: People
express themselves
and say, we want this to be
done, it can be
done. It is complicated. It will
cost money.
It will take time, but it can be
done.
MILES O'BRIEN: During his visit
to Boston,
Raphael Mechoulam visited NETA's
remarkable
dispensary. The father of
marijuana research
spent a career trying to make
this moment,
this place possible.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Brookline,
Massachusetts.
GWEN IFILL: Cleveland is getting
ready for
the Republican National
Convention next week,
and a chance to showcase some
big changes
in the city. That includes a
redesign, renovation
and revamping of the city's
central square.
Jeffrey Brown has the story with
production
help from our PBS colleagues at
WVIZ ideastream.
JEFFREY BROWN: Strike up the
band, turn on
the fountain, and ask yourself,
what makes
a 21st century city livable,
viable, even
exciting?
In Cleveland, they're hoping
part of the answer
is Public Square, the new
version of it, that
is, a $50 million project, eight
years in
the planning, 10 acres in the
heart of downtown,
remade into a space for
relaxing, meeting
up with friends, cooling off on
a hot day.
FRANK JACKSON, Mayor of
Cleveland, Ohio: This
is a public space. We own Public
Square. So
why would you not fix up your
own property?
JEFFREY BROWN: All, says Mayor
Frank Jackson,
with a larger purpose.
FRANK JACKSON: As we reinvent
and redefine
Cleveland, and we reinvent and
redefine downtown
Cleveland, Public Square is
essential in that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The
idea here in Cleveland is one
that other cities
are embracing, or re-embracing,
that the social
side of urban life, the sheer
pleasure of
hanging out with other people in
a nice setting,
can be an important driver of
economic health.
JAMES CORNER, Landscape
Architect: Well-designed
public spaces add significant
value to a city.
JEFFREY BROWN: The landscape
architect behind
Cleveland's new Public Square is
James Corner,
whose firm, James Corner Field
Operations,
is today designing public spaces
in many cities
in the U.S. and abroad. I met
him near his
New York office at his best
known site, the
elevated
High Line Park.
JAMES CORNER: It wasn't that
long ago that
there was a lot of skepticism
about public
space, that public space was
seen as a waste
of taxpayer money, filled with
litter, or
homelessness, or crime, or just
empty space.
I think we have seen a
renaissance. If you
can create these great spaces
where people
can come together, it's
enormously powerful.
It affects people's psyche, it
affects their
imagination, it affects how they
relate to
other people, and it just
charges up the positive
energy about what it means to
live in a city.
JEFFREY BROWN: In Cleveland,
Corner was faced
with a square that had long
served as a transit
hub with two busy downtown
streets dividing
it, a place to pass through, not
linger.
But it actually started life as
a public commons.
This 1936 painting for the WPA
Arts Project
imagined the square 100 years
earlier. This
was where the local militia
would assemble
and, later, where citizens
gathered to pay
respects to Abraham Lincoln
after he was assassinated.
The new idea then is actually an
old one.
VERONICA RIVERA, James Corner
Field Operations:
This is exactly the idea. People
will be able
to enjoy the park, sit back,
have lunch, just
enjoy the center of Cleveland.
JEFFREY BROWN: Veronica Rivera
moved to Cleveland
as an on-the-ground designer for
James Corner's
group. Among much else,
construction teams
removed a main thoroughfare,
restored iconic
statues, sculpted elements of
the landscape,
creating a concert hill, winding
paths and
new sight lines, all of it
creating the illusion
of a small natural setting in a
large park
planned down to the eighth of an
inch.
VERONICA RIVERA: It's relatively
flat. So
if you would have walked in and
seen everything
at the same time, it would have
been a bit
overwhelming. It would have felt
more like
a parking lot, instead of a
park.
And by using topography, we both
create an
amphitheater for the lawn for
events, and
also create these smaller, more
intimate spaces.
We wanted to create that
layering effect,
that the square can adapt to you
walking on
your own, but if it's a huge
crowd, that it
feels appropriate for that as
well.
JEFFREY BROWN: The 15-month
construction was
captured in this time-lapse
video. That followed
years of planning overseen by
two local civic
organizations, Group Plan
Commission and LAND
Studio.
Public space these days can cost
a lot of
money. More than half of what
was needed to
rebuild the square's surface
area came from
foundations, individuals and
corporations.
Ann Zoller is executive director
of LAND Studio.
ANN ZOLLER, Executive Director,
LAND Studio:
From day one, when we started
raising money,
we not only raised money for
capital, but
we raised money for the ongoing
program and
maintenance. So it's build it
right, make
sure it's used correctly, and,
at the get-go,
raise money for the future
program and maintenance.
JEFFREY BROWN: This city is on a
roll, most
recently with its basketball
championship
for LeBron James and the
Cavaliers.
And there's a building boom
downtown. Within
a few blocks of Public Square
are new hotels,
a Convention Center, renovated
apartment houses,
the large Flats East Bank
project, and much
more.
Biomedical companies have been
one driver
of jobs, and the downtown
population is on
the rise. The hope now is that
Public Square
will bring more.
But Cleveland still has plenty
of problems,
including one of the country's
highest poverty
rates.
Does Public Square benefit
everybody? It's
a majority African-American
city, I believe.
I look around downtown here,
mostly white,
I think.
FRANK JACKSON: Well, I think,
for this event,
you will have that, but when you
come here
on a daily basis and watch who
takes public
transportation, who goes into
Tower City,
who goes in to -- who comes to
work every
day, this is a public square.
And we don't play off downtown
vs. neighborhood,
black vs. white. We don't play
off those kinds
of things. What we do, we invest
in the city
of Cleveland. And when we invest
of Cleveland, we do that for the
benefit of
the entire city.
JEFFREY BROWN: And now for the
Republican
National Convention. And the
brand-new Public
Square may be ground zero for
protests and
demonstrations.
This park is going to get a real
test, right,
real soon.
FRANK JACKSON: Oh, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And your city is
going to get
a real test. Are you worried at
all about
what...
FRANK JACKSON: Oh, no, no.
JEFFREY BROWN: No?
FRANK JACKSON: No.
Look, we do what we do. You
should never ask
for something and then complain
about it.
JEFFREY BROWN: I also asked
architect James
Corner if he fears what's
coming.
JAMES CORNER: No, I relish that.
I mean, I
really hope that there is
protest and gatherings
and public speech in Public
Square. Creating
great public spaces is not only
about beautification
and greenery and social
settings. It's also
about platforms for democratic
life to play
out.
JEFFREY BROWN: Even if, in this
case, you
might have thousands and
thousands of people
trampling the whole -- it could
-- it's possible
that it could get violent.
JAMES CORNER: It's been built in
a robust
way. I wouldn't be fearful if
there are thousands
of people in there. It can take
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Maybe so, but few
major urban
projects have faced such a
dramatic test this
fast.
From Cleveland, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that makes us
all more
excited to be going to
Cleveland.
Gwen and I and the "NewsHour"
team will be
there all next week for our
special convention
coverage.
Take a look.
NARRATOR: With so much at stake,
you need
election coverage you can trust.
That's why
the "PBS NewsHour" has teamed up
with NPR
to bring you prime-time coverage
of the conventions.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
joined by
NPR's Rachel Martin for
balanced, in-depth
reporting you won't find
anywhere else.
Join us for live coverage of the
Republican
National Convention, begins
Monday, July 18,
at 8:00/7:00 Central, only on
PBS and NPR
stations.
GWEN IFILL: It's a first for
public media.
And we're really excited.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Being
able to distinguish music from
noise may owe
more to culture than biological
hard-wiring.
That's the finding of a new
study from MIT,
and it may settle a
centuries-long debate.
Read about that and much more on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in later
tonight on
"Charlie Rose": Kevin Rudd, a
former prime
minister of Australia, on what
The Hague's
ruling on the South China Sea
means for the
region and for the United
States.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.